
Update for March 29: ULA announced that the company will further delay the final mission of its Delta Heavy IV rocket as "more time is needed to instill confidence in the system" prior to launch.The era of Delta Heavy IV is coming to an end.For the last 64 years, United Launch Alliance's (ULA's) heavy-lift rocket has led an impressive career lofting large payloads into space. However, the rocket is scheduled to lift off one last time when it launches from Space Launch Complex-37 at Cape Canaveral Space Force Station in Florida. The launch was originally planned for Thursday afternoon (March 28), but ULA called that try off due to a technical issue a few minutes before liftoff. The company has not yet set a new launch date, and announced in in a post on X that "more time is needed to instill confidence in the system" prior to liftoff.Aboard the Delta Heavy IV rocket for the mission, known as NROL-70, will be a classified payload being launched on behalf of the U.S. National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). The NRO rarely discloses the nature or capabilities of its spy satellites, and this particular mission offers no exception.Yet, while the payload is a secret, the launch is not. You can watch it live here at Space.com, courtesy of ULA.Related: Delta IV Heavy rocket launches US spy satellite on penultimate mission (video)A United Launch Alliance (ULA) Delta IV Heavy rocket is raised vertically at the Space Launch Complex-37 pad in preparation to launch the NROL-70 mission for the National Reconnaissance Office. (Image credit: United Launch Alliance)The specific nature of the spacecraft launching atop ULA's Delta Heavy IV rocket on Friday of course remains a mystery, but we can assume it's a sophisticated spy satellite given the customer. The NRO is an agency within the Department of Defense tasked with developing, building and operating the United States' surveillance satellites.Get the Space.com NewsletterBreaking space news, the latest updates on rocket launches, skywatching events and more!Contact me with news and offers from other Future brandsReceive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsorsBy submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over.A mission description published by ULA states the payload aboard Friday's launch launch will "strengthen the NRO's ability to provide a wide-range of timely intelligence information to national decision makers, warfighters, and intelligence analysts to protect the nation’s vital interests and support humanitarian efforts worldwide."RELATED STORIES:— Spy satellite NROL-71 soars on secret mission atop Delta IV Heavy— Huge Delta IV Heavy rocket launches US spy satellite to orbit— The history of rocketsIn addition to the Delta IV Heavy, ULA plans on retiring another one of its rockets: The workhorse Atlas V. The idea is to make way for the company's new Vulcan Centaur, which launched on its first mission on Jan. 8, 2024 when it sent Astrobotic's Peregrine lunar lander moonward.The Atlas V will keep flying through 2029, however, as it is already booked for missions to help develop Amazon's Project Kuiper internet constellation and send Boeing's Starliner crew capsule to the International Space Station on its first launch, slated for no earlier than May 1.Editor's note: This story was updated at 2:53 p.m. ET on March 28 with the new planned launch date of March 29.
