
SpaceX has reset the launch of another batch of its Starlink internet satellites to tonight (April 1).A Falcon 9 rocket carrying 22 Starlink spacecraft was set to lift off from Vandenberg Space Force Base in California on Thursday (March 28), but the company called off the attempt before beginning to fuel the vehicle. Bad weather scuttled another planned try on Saturday night (March 30). SpaceX is now targeting liftoff tonight, during a four-hour window that opens at 10:30 p.m. EDT (7:30 p.m. Pacific time or 0230 GMT on April 2). You can watch it live via SpaceX's account on X. Coverage will begin about five minutes before the liftoff. Related: Starlink satellite train: How to see and track it in the night skyIf all goes according to plan, the Falcon 9's first stage will come back to Earth for a vertical touchdown about 8.5 minutes after launch. That landing will occur on the deck of the drone ship Of Course I Still Love You, which will be stationed in the Pacific Ocean. It will be the 15th launch and landing for this particular booster, according to a SpaceX mission description.

The Falcon 9's upper stage will continue hauling the 22 Starlink satellites toward low Earth orbit (LEO), where they will be deployed about 62 minutes after liftoff.RELATED STORIES:— SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket ties 19 flight-record with launch from California (video)— 8 ways that SpaceX has transformed spaceflight— SpaceX launches Crew-8 astronaut mission to International Space Station for NASA (video)The rescheduled launch will be the 32nd Falcon 9 flight of 2024, and the 21st dedicated to building out the Starlink megaconstellation. To date, SpaceX has lofted 6,100 Starlink satellites, 5,633 of which are currently operational, according to astrophysicist and satellite tracker Jonathan McDowell.Get the Space.com NewsletterBreaking space news, the latest updates on rocket launches, skywatching events and more!Contact me with news and offers from other Future brandsReceive email from us on behalf of our trusted partners or sponsorsBy submitting your information you agree to the Terms & Conditions and Privacy Policy and are aged 16 or over.Those already-staggering numbers will continue to grow far into the future. SpaceX has permission to deploy 12,000 Starlink craft in LEO and has applied for approval for another 30,000 on top of that.
